about the Rice SEU having an interest in expanding their athletic programs in the middle 1920s.
Rice brought in Johnny Heisman, the Heisman Trophy man, as an athletic director.
He was an older man at that time.
And Claude Rothkiew had left A&M to go to Rice prior to that, and that had worked with him for a year or so here.
And Dad was offered a track coach's job at Rice during the 1920s.
And he apparently asked Mother, would you rather live in College Station or Houston?
And I don't know what the answer was, but he did stay here.
But A&M, as in the case of the ex-bible, offered
raise his income to the point that the Rice child would have given, and Dad decided to stay here.
I think Dad felt in the long run that the state universities had so much going for them that the smaller private schools could have their moment in athletics, but in the long run it would be with the state universities.
Under the new head coach, did your dad's responsibilities change after Coach Bible left?
No.
Matty Bell came here as the head coach in football, and Dad liked Matty Bell a lot.
Where was he from?
Do you remember?
He had coached at TCU and done very well.
I didn't know TCU then here, then SMU.
Yeah.
His teams beat A&M with some regularity, and so he came here.
Of course, he really didn't have a chance.
to succeed as a football coach because this this problem that Dix had seen coming came when Matty was here and I sound like my dad talking because it was all first name but but he had
just not the athlete, just not the quality of athlete that you needed to do well, and his teams showed that.
Matty Veldad said was an excellent coach of defensive football, and of course a little offensively too, but he was particularly good in defense, but they certainly needed it because they didn't, they were on the defense most of the time.
In fact, one of the years, one of his... Matty Bell was here, I think, through the 32 season, football season.
And in 1930, Dad's championship
record-setting pole vaulter and Harry Steitler.
Anyway, his senior year, after not being on the football team, went out for the football team and made starting quarterback as a 130-something pounder.
But that just shows what the A&M football was down to at that point.
And your dad, when did he become the track coach?
Dad became head track when he was assistant coach in the spring of 1921, his second semester of his first year.
Then in 1922 he became track coach.
freshman football, freshman basketball, and track.
Yes.
And then he actually just, as time went on, moved entirely to the track.
Now, had he been a track athlete back in college?
Yes.
TO A DEGREE.
HE WAS MAINLY A FOOTBALL PLAYER AND BASEBALL PLAYER.
TRACK WAS NOT AS DEVELOPED AS SPORT, BUT HE WAS THE TENNESSEE INTRESCHOLASTIC FULL-BALL CHAMPION, HIS SENIOR IN HIGH SCHOOL.
AND HE WAS A GOOD SPRINTER AND A GOOD BROAD JUMPER, A LONG JUMPER AS IT'S CALLED NOW.
AND I MEAN, WE'RE NOT TALKING ABOUT TIMES THAT ARE REMARKABLE, LIKE 10 SECONDS AND 100-YARD DASH.
and 21 feet in the broad jump, but he was basically an untutored athlete.
But he had had track exposure.
But really, his two major sports were football and baseball.
And being the junior man in the athletic department, he got the track teams.
But he stuck with it and developed it and really had a bond career.
His cross-country and track teams won as many championships as the rest of the athletic department put together in the years he coached.
And in the 30s, the track was around Kyle Field.
That's correct.
So the track meets were held there in the stadium.
In terms of personal joy and satisfaction,
Did it become his special joy?
Yes, it was.
He always retained an interest in football.
I remember sitting by him at games, and you could tell he was really one step ahead of most athletes on the field.
And I remember when I was a high school boy playing football,
my junior and senior year I was starting, and I thought I was a fairly good football player.
And after each game, we would sit around the dining room table, and he would critique my performance.
And I found out that I was not doing quite as well as I thought I was.
As the head track coach, how did he attract outstanding track prospects here?
Well, in the... In the 30s.
Well, actually, let me go back to the football.
Oh, okay.
As freshman football coach, apparently, nearly the total freshman class would show up on the team.
And maybe at one of the initial student indoctrination events, you know, the kids were asked to come out.
He would have 250 boys.
or 200 or something of that sort.
And of course, you spent the first month of practice weaning, separating the athletes from the non-athletes.
But as track coach, he did the same thing.
He went to the student body.
and asked them to come out if they had some ability anyway.
And as a consequence, he developed a great number of athletes who were Southwest Conference caliber, who had had very little, if any, high school experience.
And after the development of Ryan Field, where the freshmen were
after World War II, where they were housed separate from the upperclassmen, he would go out there and speak to the freshman class.
And I can remember a boy who won the mile in 1950 being one of those boys who came out.
All right, were they, so they were in the 30s, they were not giving, A&M was not giving track scholarships.
Yes, or football or basketball or anything.
But they, they, let's make believe that he identifies.
I think that they, the student, the waiter,
Boys made $30 a month, a dollar a day or something like that.
But they actually waited on the tables.
It didn't work.
And I know in one case, Dad kept one of his boys on the track to a hurdler, a very good hurdler.
past the time he would show up for work, and the sergeant who handled the waiters took him off his job.
And so Dad had to pay for his monthly expenses until he could get him back established on the job.
But the point was, they worked.
This was not a cruise or anything of that sort.
Where was, in the 30s, where was his office, his work place?
The offices of the coaches were either in the little athletic department building that was freestanding in front of the stadium, or in some offices in the DeWare Fieldhouse on the front entry side.
There was a row of offices there.
During that period, normally the head football coach was the athletic director.
That was the routine, yes.
Following Coach Bell was that when Homer Norton came?
Homer Norton came then, yes.
Describe Coach Norton in terms of personality and so forth.
Let me tell you a story.
That's good.
About my ophthalmology practice.
Both Homer Norton and D.X.
Bible were my patients.
Because of Dad, I'm sure.
D.X.
was living in Austin at the time, but when he would come over to visit Mother and Dad, he and his wife, then he would have his eye examination in the Homer Norton course.
was living here for some years before he moved to Galveston.
But both of them were at the point of life where, you know, you customarily wear bifocals.
Both were too vain to do it.
That's good.
The ex-bible had separate distance and reading glasses, and he liked to play golf.
And so we fitted him with a little bifocal that had something that was a little round reading part that was about five or six or seven millimeters round.
I mean, much too small for reading a newspaper, but you could at least look at your golf scorecard.
That was his one concession to a bifocal.
Homer Norton was, at that time, this was the early 1960s, or the middle 1960s, was writing common, athletic commentary about football, you know, A&M football games or anybody in the conference.
He was, I think, the Houston Post employed him.
to do this, or the Chronicle.
And so he did get one set of bifocals so he could write his copy down and look down at the field, but he would not wear them otherwise.
But the point is both these two men had an image of themselves that did not involve physical frailty.
Let's live that way.
Now, both of them, I mean, Homer Norton was a rather quiet person,
The ex-bible was not noisy either at all, but probably a little more of a speaker than Homer and Orton.
But both of them were comfortable people to be around, and both were, I think, alert, intelligent men.
In fact, Homer and Orton was really very much
athletic theoretician in many ways.
In fact, I think he had a complexity of plays and this sort of thing that many people didn't have.
When they were both head coaches, Coach Bible at Austin and Coach Norton here and were rivals, were they friendly with each other?
I don't know how friendly they were.
I think they were courteous, but they were rivals.
And in 1939, at the
NM beat Texas here in College Station to win the Southwest Conference and National Championship.
But we were ahead enough where it was semi-comfortable.
And when we were, I think, 13 points ahead or something of that sort,
Homer Norton instructed his team to pull a hideout play, and this meant that one of our boys left the field seemingly, but actually stood just inside the sideline
on the playing field, and a pass was called, and Bama Smith ran down the field, and of course nobody thought he was even legally playing, and he was not guarded or watched, and he caught the pass and ran for a touchdown, which ran the score up a little bit.
After that, the University of Texas never lost to A&M.
College Station or Austin as long as the ex-bible coached.
And so I think there may have been a little bit of a feeling after that.
That somebody had rubbed it in.
If I could chat with your dad about which one he respected the most, what do you think his
Well, as a coach, I think he would have put them on the same level.
He and the ex-bible were extremely good friends.
Homer Norton and Dad were professional colleagues.
And in fact, Dad actually, after his military experience in World War II at active duty, came back and rejoined the physical education department.
And Homer Norton asked Daddy to come back as track coach.
And so, I mean, I think their relations were good.
He came to me as a patient.
But I think it was a professional relation more.
And I can recall when I was sick once, Mrs. Norton brought some very nice vegetable soup over one time, too.
But I mean, these were courteous relations.
And they were neighbors, weren't they?
Yes.
And there was one house between us.
But Dad and Nick's Bible were just best of friends.
And they continued to, you know, each year, Mother and Dad would visit Austin once or twice, and each year they would come over here.
And this was something that, a friendship that continued throughout their lives.
All right, back to the 30s.
You finished high school what year?
1946.
46.
Okay.
Mr. Gilchrist came as dean in the mid-30s.
He came as dean of engineering in 1937.
All right.
Henry is compared to your age.
Henry would be four classes ahead of me.
So when I entered high school, he had just departed.
And I might add that you asked about friends.
The Gilchrist were as close friends as mother and dad had and throughout
their time here and after retirement.
And Mr. Gilchrist, they were both my patients too later.
And in fact, I had him write me a letter of recommendation when I applied to a fellowship at the Mayo Clinic.
Oh, my goodness.
Describe the Gilchrist.
Describe them, the husband and wife.
They were an interesting combination.
He was a large man tall.
not overweight, and she was probably about five feet, two inches tall.
He was publicly a quieter person, and she was a very active person, rather very managerial of him, I might add.
He managed the university and she managed him.
That's a good summary.
Yeah.
And Bill Wilchrist was a person who had a lot of... He was a thinker and a planner, and he had plans for N.M.
that were in cases actuated and plans that were maybe actuated after he left.
More than most people realize, an architect of much of what A&M has been in the last 40 years of the century.
His public relations were, I think, best described as abysmal.
At least in cases.
He came to be dean.
Let me qualify.
I won't say they were abysmal.
They were abysmal with some former students.
and some students.
If you went in to talk to them, as some students did, you know, if they hadn't passed a course, I mean, they were not going to expect the grade to get changed by Mr. Gilchrist.
I mean, the grade stood, you know.
And this is the way he was.
I can remember him talking to the head of the highway commission.
long after he retired, he said that if any bid that comes before the commission, the low bid should be accepted if it's of equal quality.
It doesn't matter if the high bid is from New York and the low bid is from Texas.
The best economic one.
And that's the way he was.
And one of the
the sort of paradoxes.
He used to play ping pong with me.
I think he liked me fairly well, and we had a ping pong table on our porch.
And I called him Gibb until my first week as a student at A&M, and it was Mr. Gilchrist after that.
But during the
That fall of 1946, there was a lot of unrest related to the cadet corps.
And I was a cadet in the cadet dorm area, not one of the half of the cadets who were freshmen who were at the
It was a year where a striking comparison occurred because almost 50% of the freshmen who were in the traditional units on campus did not come back the second semester.
And something like six or eight or nine percent at Bryan Field, where the upperclassmen presence was not so much.
failed to come back.
But because of the hazing and all that, there was a legislature investigation that spring in 47.
And during all this unrest, the Cadet Corps marched on Mr. Gilchrist's house.
And I was, you know, I was marched right along in my unit.
I didn't even know where, the freshmen didn't know where we were going.
And I remember he came out.
He hit his, his,
The collar was open, and I don't know if he had a tie on that was loose, but I don't think he did.
And the cadet colonel or someone presented the resignations of all the cadets, not all, but most of the cadet officers.
But he was a resolute person.
He did not back down on what he thought was right.
And I don't think what he did for A&M in the planning and the actuation of the plans behind the scenes was ever really fully recognized.
I have that impression too.
He came here to be dean of engineering.
Yes.
Did engineering kind of need a pickup at that point, or do you know?
Well, I don't know if it did or didn't.
That's why I was so young at that point.
Henry has said, I haven't recorded him yet, just in conversation, he said that they, that he, and he thought his mother agreed with him, that they left a real nice house in Austin, and they moved over here to this little country place, that his dad kind of bribed him by giving him a new bicycle.
Yeah, I heard that, yeah.
They lived on the west side houses where the tennis courts were later, I guess.
And that sort of, anyway, the far west part of the campus.
And they had just a, you know, a wooden frame house, yeah.
Now did, was the, that house that?
that the White House that now stands near the president's house?
Yes, that Mr. Coldest lived in.
That was built specifically for the Gilchrist.
In those early years?
I think Mrs. Gilchrist basically laid out the floor plan and everything.
Now, that was rather unusual, wasn't it?
Nobody else got a... Well, he came here.
He was a state highway engineer and had influential friends.
Were they well accepted?
Were they well accepted by the other families living on campus?
You know, I don't know.
See, they came in 37, and the house that they, a nice house that was built for them was not probably built in 38 or 39.
And then everybody moved off the campus in 1940.
I don't know how well they integrated.
They were good friends with one of Dad from the beginning.
And Dad and Mr. Gilchrist had some attributes that were similar in the sense that both of them stood up for what they thought was right, and I think that they sort of respected each other.
Did you all move, you said, moved off campus in 40?
Did you all move off the campus?
Yes.
Where?
We moved to 501 Fairview.
And Dad bought a campus house and had it moved off.
It was not the one we were living in, but it was the home that the McGinnises lived in.
And McGinnises were very good friends.
And we'd been in the house before, in other words, knew it.
When we got here in the fall of 59, there were still two or three of those old faculty houses
left on the campus, no one was living in them.
Did everybody move out then in 40 and those houses were left vacant during the war?
Most of the houses were moved off.
The university had no use for them, and so they offered to sell them to anybody who wanted to buy them.
And so many of them were moved into various locations in College Station.
What was the reason for that decision to move everyone off?
Haskell, I don't know, but A&M was growing prior to the war.
It hit 6,000 just in about 1941, I think.
And with the student body essentially doubling in eight or nine years,
AND THE FACULTY BECOMING LARGER AND ONLY A FRACTION OF FACULTY COULD LIVE ON THE CAMPUS.
I THINK ALL THESE THINGS FIGURED INTO IT.
PLUS THE FACT I GUESS THE LAND WAS NEEDED FOR OTHER THINGS.
ALL RIGHT.
YOU THEN ARE GETTING READY FOR HIGH SCHOOL WHEN THE WAR
What was your reaction as a bright, highly literate young man about this war?
What did this war seem to be?
Well, maybe I wasn't so bright and illiterate.
Maybe I was more illiterate than literate.
But what did the war mean?
Did this seem to relate to you and your friends?
Well, of course, I entered high school in 1942.
I can remember that President Roosevelt's speech before Congress was broadcast through the PA system, and it was, you know, sort of sobering.
At school?
Yes.
I guess I would have been really in junior high school at that point.
with apparently all the grades.
And that was sobering.
And of course, things like the gas rationing meant that people could only have, you know, four gallons a month or something.
And there was some food limitation too, you know, rationing.
And so these things did make us aware that things were happening.
And my dad received a note, a telegram from the War Department saying that it was interesting, he was a colonel, and that he was given the chance.
He was given a choice of entering the military.
He wasn't.
He had to.
And frankly, the military didn't need a lot of older colonels.
But Dad, and I remember that getting the, Dad getting that and talking, the family talking about it.
He did go on active duty.
But, but, and we were with him in the Carolinas and Tennessee.
And then we came back here and finished high school, consolidated.
But those things, those were aspects of the war.
And I can remember the Victory Garden and
But as far as our just day-to-day life, I think it was just like it would have been otherwise.
You know, we went to school and we had our little parties and we had our friends and we had our athletic events.
Did any of your close acquaintances get called up?
Pretty soon?
Well, I was not old enough to be in that category.
Wasn't anybody next door then.
The boys who graduated from last year in 1945 were called up, I remember.
And I know one who was two years ahead of him.
He was killed later.
He went on duty in World War II, but then went back on duty in Korea and was killed there.
From the viewpoint of a youngster, we had a lot of fun during the war.
We didn't feel a lot of deprivation.
Your dad, you mentioned Colonel.
Had he been in the reserve all?
Dad's military experience was sort of unique.
It was almost the old South vintage.
His college, Mississippi College, had provided a company to the Confederate service in the Civil War.
And I might add, I think about 90 of 110 were killed.
Well, anyway, World War II came along, and of course, as Dad said, you know, we really didn't know what, pardon me, World War I came along.
And, you know, by that time, everything was romanticized.
And so the college then decides, with the support of the president, that it would form another unit, and it formed an artillery battery in the Mississippi National Guard.
It was activated.
And the student body elected its officers.
And Dad was, I think, a private for two weeks, and he was a captain.
I'm smiling because that was what happened at the beginning of the Civil War.
Each unit elected their own officers.
And they had said that being in artillery, you know, there's a technical element there.
And he said that three or four more senior officers were sent from his division brigade, artillery brigade, to Fort Sill, the artillery school.
And all of them failed.
And apparently, that situation in that war, they didn't find them a job running the PX or something.
They left the military.
They were dismissed, or whatever you call it.
And so then they finally got down to Captain Anderson.
And Dad said that each week,
that the grades were posted.
And when you didn't make it, he said that was the most difficult test of his life.
I bet so.
And he passed.
And his commanding officer decided that then that any other artilleryman who went to the school would go through a little preliminary course that Dad taught.
And apparently there was a ceremonial unit in New Orleans that had some three-inch cannons.
This is not 75-millimeter, three-inch, that apparently the Mississippi artillery brigade was allowed to have.
And so Dad set up a little artillery preliminary school.
And the officers who then went, at least I guess most of them did OK.
Anyway, because of this, he was promoted to major and he went to France as the youngest United States Army major.